>>> ON THIS EDITION FO
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 9th -
>> THE PHILIPPINES GET
OVERWHELMED BY A RECORD BREAKING
TYPHOON.
THE LATEST FROM GENEVA AS TALK
OVER IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRA
CONTINUE
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT ONE
STATE'S BOLD PLAN TO REDUCE TH
COST OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS BE.
>> HUNDRED BUCKS I'M SAVIN
MONTHLY THROUGH THIS PROGRAM
>>> NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOU
WEEKEND.
>> GOOD EVENING, THANKS FO
JOINING US
THE CENTRAL PHILIPPINES HAVE
BEEN DEVASTATED BY WHAT'S BEIN
DESCRIBED AS ONE OF TH
STRONGEST STORMS EVER TO MAK
LANDFALL
RED CROSS OFFICIALS ESTIMATE
1,200 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED.
TYPHOON HAYIAN RIPPED THROUG
THE EASTERN ISLANDS OF THE
PHILIPPINES.
METEOROLOGIST SAID THE STORM HAD
WINDS OF 200 MILES PER HOUR WHEN
IT CAME ASHORE
IT CRUSHED BUILDINGS, BROUGH
DOWN POWER LINES AND LEFT ROAD
IMPASSABLE
WIDESPREAD FLOODING AFTER
POWERFUL STORM SURGE
>> DEVASTATION IS -- I DON'T
HAVE THE WORDS FOR IT.
IT'S REALLY HORRIFIC
IT'S GREAT HUMAN TRAGEDY
THERE'S NO POWER
BY THE TIME THE SUNSETS IT'S
DARK AND, YOU KNOW, YOU'RE JUS
GOING TO HAVE TO MAKE YOUR WAY
TO WHERE YOU CAN FIND SOME
SHELTER.
>> FILIPINO OFFICIALS REPORTED
WIDESPREAD LOOTING IN TH
AFTERMATH OF THE STORM
HAYIAN IS NOW HEADING TOWARD
VIETNAM WHERE EMERGENC
PREPARATIONS ARE BEING MADE AN
SEVERAL HUNDRED,000 PEOPLE HAV
BEEN EVACUATED
FOR AN EYEWITNESS ACCOUNT WE
SPOKE EARLIER WITH A FREELANCE
JOURNALIST
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
CASUALTIES OCCURRED THERE.
WE ASKED HIM WHAT TO DESCRIB
WHAT WE SAW.
>> Reporter: I GREW UP HERE IN
THE PHILIPPINES AND I KNOW WHA
TYPHOONS WERE LIKE
THIS DIDN'T FEEL LIKE A TYPHOON.
THIS WAS A TORNADO
BUT A TORNADO THAT LASTED FO
THREE, FOUR HOURS.
THE WIND WAS SWIRLING AND THER
WAS DEBRIS FLYING FROM ALL
DIRECTIONS
WE WENT UP TO THE SECOND FLOOR
TO TRY TO ESCAPE THE STORM
SURGE, OBVIOUSLY
BUT DEBRIS FROM THE HOTEL'
HALLWAY WAS FLYING OVER OU
HEADS AND SO WHEN HE TO GO BAC
DOWN THE GROUND FLOOR BUT THEN
WATER WAS RISING REALLY QUICK.
SO WE WENT BACK UP TO THE SECOND
FLOOR AND WE WERE THERE FOR
GOOD PROBABLY 20, 30 MINUTES
BEFORE THE CEILING STARTED
FALLING OFF AND THE ROOF STARTED
FLYING AND IT DID FEEL LIKE IT
WAS GOING CRUMBLE.
IT WAS HONESTLY THE SCARIEST
FOUR HOURS OF MY LIFE.
WE ALL THOUGHT THAT WE WER
GOING TO DIE THERE
BECAUSE IT WAS POSSIBLE.
THE STORM PASSED
AND WHEN WE THOUGHT IT WAS SAF
FOR US TO VENTURE OUT, WE DID,
IT WAS COMPLETE DEVASTATION AN
DESTRUCTION AS FAR AS THE EY
COULD SEE.
THE TYPHOON SPARED NOTHING I
ITS PATH
THE HOUSES WERE DESTROYED,
BUILDINGS WERE DESTROYED, THER
WERE BODIES EVERY WHERE.
THERE WAS A LOT OF PANIC
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAD GONE INT
THE SUPERMARKETS AND EVEN TH
APPLIANCE STORES AND THE MALLS
AND THEY WERE LOOTING NOT JUST
FOOD, THEY WERE LOOTING NOT JUST
THE WATER, BUT THEY WERE LOOTING
COMPUTERS, TELEVISION SETS
ANYTHING THAT THEY COULD GET
IT WAS COMPLETE MAYHEM
IT WAS JUST COMPLETE MAYHEM.
THERE WAS NO ONE TO POLICE THE
PEOPLE BECAUSE LOCAL POLIC
THEMSELVES WERE VICTIMS OF THE
TYPHOON.
AND THE MILITARY COULD NOT EVE
GET THROUGH TO THE CITY.
THERE WAS LOSS OF LIVES.
WE WALKED ALONG THE HIGHWAY AN
THERE WERE DEAD BODIES ALONG THE
HIGHWAY.
WE LOOKED INTO THE DEBRIS OF THE
HOUSES THAT HAD COLLAPSED AN
THERE WERE BODIES JUSTING OUT OF
DOORS.
THERE WERE BODIES THAT WER
STUCK IN THE DEBRIS, AND THERE
WERE FAMILIES THAT WERE LOOKIN
FOR THEIR LOVED ONES
IT WAS A VERY HEARTBREAKIN
DEVASTATING SCENE THERE.
>> IN SWITZERLAND TODAY HIGH
LEVEL NEGOTIATIONS ENDED CUSHING
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM HIT A
SNAG AFTER THE FRENCH MINISTER
WARNED THAT UNITED STATES AN
OTHER MAJOR POWERS WERE BEIN
DRAWN INTO WHAT HE CALLED
FOOL'S GAME THAT COULD WORK TO
IRAN'S ADVANTAGE
THE FOREIGN MINISTER SAID FRANCE
HAD REJECTED AN EARLIER DRAF
AGREEMENT.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY IS
IN GENEVA FOR THE TALKS ALON
WITH THE FOREIGN MINISTERS O
IRAN, BRITAIN, FRANCE, GERMANY
RUSSIA AND CHAMPION.
YESTERDAY ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU SHARPLY
CRITICIZED THE DEAL BEIN
DISCUSSED THEN CALLING IT TH
DEAL OF THE CENTURY IN IRAN'
FUTURE
OF COURSE WHENEVER THERE'S ANY
DISCUSSION ABOUT IRAN'S NUCLEA
PROGRAM HOW CLOSE ARE TH
IRANIANS TO DEVELOPING A NUCLEAR
WEAPON
WE ARE JOINED BY DAVID ALBRIGHT.
HE'S A LEADING EXPERT ON IRAN'
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
I THINK IN THE BACKGROUND OF ALL
THESE TALKS, ALL THESE DELEGATES
AND DIPLOMATS HAVE TO WONDER HOW
CLOSE IS IRAN AND WILL THESE
SANCTIONS WORK
>> IRAN HAS BEEN GREATLY
INCREASING ITS NUCLEAR
CAPABILITY OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS, AND YOU DON'T THINK IRA
HAS MADE A DECISION TO BUILD
NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
BUT IF THEY DID, AND THEY US
THEIR CURRENT STOCKPILES OF LO
ENRICHED URANIUM, AND THE NUMBER
OF CENTRIFUGES THEY HAVE
INSTALLED AT THEIR TWO
ENRICHMENT SITES THEN THEY COULD
BREAK OUT IN AS LITTLE -- BREC
OUT AND HAVE ENOUGH WEAPON GRADE
URANIUM FOR A BOMB IN AS LITTL
TO ONE AND ONE AND A HAL
MONTHS
IT COULD TAKE THEM LONGER IF
THINGS WENT WRONG.
IT WOULD TAKE THEM LONGER TO
BUILD THE BOMB ITSELF.
ESTIMATES VARY
IT'S A MURKY AREA TO MAK
ESTIMATES IN
IT VARY FROM A COUPLE OF MONTH
TO A YEAR.
DO THAT HE WANT CRUDE DEVICE
THEY CAN TEST UNDERGROUND OR D
THEY WANT A WAR HEAD FOR A
BALLISTIC MISSILE AND THE LATTER
WOULD TAKE MORE THAN A YEAR TO
ACCOMPLISH
>> WITHOUT GETTING INTO
PHYSICS LESSONS THERE'
DIFFERENT GRADATIONS OF URANIUM,
HOW IT'S PROCESSED AND WHETHER
IT'S FOR NUCLEAR POWER O
NUCLEAR WEAPON
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE SAME
3.5% ENRICHED URANIUM PRODUCED
FOR A NUCLEAR POWER REACTOR CA
BE ENRICHED UP TO 90%, THE
ENRICHMENT LEVEL YOU USE IN
NUCLEAR WEAPON
3.5% IN WHICH ENRICHMENT I
QUITE A WAYS, 70% OF THE WAY T
90% ISN'T LINEAR AND A LOT O
WORK GOES INTO THAT.
IT'S ONE OF THE DILEMMAS O
THIS
THERE'S NO CLEAR BENCHMARK O
ACTION ONE CAN TAKE THAT WOULD
PROVIDE A GUARANTEE THAT I
WOULDN'T LATER USE THE ENRICHE
URANIUM TO FURTHER ENRICH IT U
TO WEAPON GRADE.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE DELIVERY
CAPABILITIES
THAT'S PRIMARILY WHY THE REASO
SO MANY PEOPLE IN TH
NEIGHBORHOOD, SO TO SPEAK IS
CONCERNED.
>> LIKELIHOOD IF IRAN BREAKS
OUT, IF IT DECIDED TO DO THAT,
IT WOULD BE SEEKING AT LEAST I
MY VIEW PROBABLY JUST A CRUD
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE.
THAT'S WHAT NORTH KOREA DID.
THAT'S WHAT OTHER COUNTRIES DID.
SOUTH AFRICA
THEY JUST TRY TO GET ONE THA
ISN'T THAT DELIVERABLE
CERTAINLY NOT DELIVERABLE BY
MISSILES
AND THAT THEY WOULD BE LOOKING
TO JUST GET ACROSS THE THRESHOLD
AND ESTABLISH THAT
IT COULD BE THROUGH LEAKING IT
HAS NUCLEAR WEAPONS, IT COULD BE
CONDUCTING A FULL SCAL
UNDERGROUND TEST
THAT'S THE PRIORITY.
MORE THAN LIKELY THEY WOULDN'T
NEED A FULL YEAR TO HAVE A
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE DEVICE THE
COULD TEST UNDERGROUND OR CLAI
THEY HAVE -- THAT THEY ARE NOW A
NUCLEAR POWER.
>> HOW MUCH DOES THAT CHANGE
THEIR NEGOTIATING POSTURE OR THE
POSTURE OF THE WORLD NEGOTIATING
WITH THE
>> IF THEY MOVE TO GET NUCLEAR
WEAPONS, THERE'S A VERY GOOD
CHANCE THAT THERE WOULD BE A
WAR.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS MADE I
CLEAR THAT HE WOULD PREVENT IRAN
FROM GETTING A NUCLEAR WEAPON,
ISRAEL'S THRESHOLD FOR ATTACK IS
MUCH LOWER THAN IRAN MOVING TO
GET A NUCLEAR WEAPON
SO I THINK IF IRAN DID THAT,
IT'S GOING TO EITHER HAVE TO D
IT IN A WAY IT WAS NOT DETECTE
BEFORE THEY SUCCEED.
AND PARTICULARLY PRODUCE THE
WEAPON GRADE URANIUM FOR A BOMB.
I MEAN THAT'S REALLY THEIR LON
POLE THE INTENT.
ONCE THEY HAVE THAT THEY CAN
MOVE IT AND IT'S ALMOS
IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND IT AND TH
OPTIONS TO STOP IRAN AT THAT
POINT WILL BECOME MUCH MOR
COMPLICATED.
BEFORE THEY HAVE THE WEAPO
GRADE URANIUM FOR A BOMB, SITE
CAN BE ENRICHED FOR A BOMB
IF YOU DO IT IN TIME YOU CAN
STOP IRAN FROM SUCCEEDING.
IRAN MAY BE TRYING TO DEVELO
THE CAPABILITY WHERE IT COUL
BREAK OUT AND PRODUCE ENOUGH
WEAPON GRADE URANIUM FOR A BOM
BEFORE THEY ARE DETECTED AND
THAT'S ONE OF THE CLOCKS TICKING
IN THIS NEGOTIATION.
OUR ASSESSMENT THEY CAN REAC
THAT POINT AS SOON AS MID-2014
>> DAVID ALBRIGHT FOR INSTITUT
OF SCIENCE AND INTERNATIONAL
SECURITY
THANKS SO MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> ELSEWHERE OVERSEAS GERMANY
MARKED THE 75th ANNIVERSARY OF
THE NIGHT OF BROKEN GLASS WHEN
NAZIS AND SYMPATHIZERS KILLE
JEWS AND DEPORTED MORE T
CONCENTRATION CAMPS.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKE
SAID TODAY THE EVENT MARKED WHAT
SHE CALLED A REAL LOW POINT IN
GERMAN HISTORY AND URGED HER
COUNTRYMEN NEVER TO FORGET THE
PAST
>>> ACCORDING TO A NEW POLL MORE
THAN THREE QUARTERS OF JEW
LIVING IN GERMANY TODAY BELIEV
ANTI-SEMITISM IS ON THE RISE
IN THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE BEIN
TREATED FOR LUNG CANCER IN
BEIJING.
CITY HEALTH OFFICIALS DIDN'T SAY
WHAT CAUSED THE INCREASE BUT
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATIO
BELIEVE THE INCREASE IS CLOSEL
LINKED TO THE CITY'S WEL
DOCUMENTED STRUGGLES WITH AI
POLLUTION.
HERE IN THE U.S. TWO ADMIRAL
HAVE BEEN PLACED ON LEAVE AN
THEIR ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED
SUSPENDED FOR THEIR ALLEGED ROLE
IN A BRIBERY SCANDAL
THE TWO ARE BEING INVESTIGATED
FOR THEIR LINKS TO A SINGAPORE
BASED DEFENSE CONTRACTOR WHO
PROVIDE CASH AND PROSTITUTES T
U.S. NAVY PERSONNEL.
TWO NAVY COMMANDERS WERE
ARRESTED EARLIER IN CONNECTION
WITH THE CASE.
THE NAVY SAYS OTHER NAVA
OFFICERS ARE LIKELY TO IMPLY
INDICATED.
NEW JERSEY HAS BECOME THIR
STATE IN THE NATION TO ALLOW
POKER GAMBLING ONLINE.
IT GRANTED LESSONS YESTERDAY T
SEVERAL INTERNATIONAL GAMING
COMPANIES.
BILLS TO LEGALIZE ONLINE
GAMBLING IS PENDING IN
MASSACHUSETTS, PENNSYLVANIA AN
CALIFORNIA
THOUSANDS ARE GATHERING AT THE
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE U.S. AI
FORCE IN DAYTON, OHIO TO HONOR
MEMBERS OF THE DOOLITTLE
RAIDERS.
THE GROUP OF PILOTS WHO BOMBED
JAPAN IN RESPONSE TO THE
JAPANESE ATTACK ON PEARL HARBOR.
THEIR ATTACK IS CREDITED WIT
TURNING THE TIDE IN THE PACIFIC.
THERE'S THE THREE SURVIVIN
MEMBERS OF THE GROUP
THEY WILL BE TOASTING COMRADES
WITH COGNAC FROM 1896 THE YEAR
DOOLITTLE WAS BORN
>>> NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
IN DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND THE WORLD
TONIGHT WE RETURN TO A TOPIC W
FOCUSED ON LAST WEEKEND THE HIGH
COST OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
SOMETHING MANY AMERICANS HAV
BEEN COMPLAINING ABOUT FOR
YEARS.
ONE STATE HAS RECENTLY PASSE
LEGISLATION DESIGNED TO BRIN
DOWN DRUG COSTs.
RESIDENTS OF MAINE CAN ORDER
DRUGS FROM MAINE AND FRO
OVERSEAS
THIS HAS PROMPTED A LAWSUIT.
>> Reporter: THE BATTLE BETWEE
THE STATE OF MAINE AND THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY STARTE
IN PORTLAND WHEN THE CITY FOUN
A WAY TO CUT ITS HEALTH CARE
COSTS.
BY THE TIME THE BATTLE ENDS TH
WHOLE COUNTRY MIGHT FEEL THE
EFFECTS.
IF MAINE WINS IT COULD GET A LOT
EASIER FOR AMERICANS TIME PORT
CHEAPER PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
IF THE PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANIE
WINS IMPORTING DRUGS COULD B
HARDER THAN EVER
ONE SIDE IN THE BATTLE IS MADE
UP OF EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYEES.
THEY SAY THEY ARE FIGHTING FOR
THE RIGHT TO SPEND LESS ON
HEALTH CARE.
HOW MUCH MONEY DOES THIS SAV
THE COMPANY EVERY YEAR
>> ABOUT $400,000.
THAT'S OUR SAVINGS PER YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE OTHER SID
INCLUDES MAINE'S FARM SICHTS AND
RETAILERS AND THE PHARMACEUTICAL
INDUSTRY
THEY SAY THEY ARE FIGHTING T
PROTECT THE SAFETY OF CONSUMER
WHO MIGHT BE TEMPTED TO TR
IMPORTED PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT THESE
MEDICINES AREN'T SAFE.
>> Reporter: THE BATTLE STARTE
IN 2004 WHEN PORTLAND OFFERE
IT'S 1400 EMPLOYEES THE OPTION
AVENUE PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN.
INSTEAD OF GOING THROW CAL
PHARMACIES TO GET THEI
PRESCRIPTIONS FILLED AND PAYIN
A SHARE OF THE COST THEY COULD
GET THE DRUGS BY MAIL FROM
LICENSED PHARMACIES IN
AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, CANADA
AND THE UK WITHOUT PAYING
PENNY.
CITY EMPLOYEE JEFF SIGNED HI
7-YEAR-OLD SON UP TO GET ASTHM
MEDS
>> I'M SAVING MONEY.
IT'S HUNDRED BUCKS THAT I'
SAVING MONTHLY THROUGH THI
PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: KAREN GETS DRUG
THAT CONTROL PAIN AND ADHD
EVERY THREE MONTHS A FRESH
SUPPLY LANDS ON HER DOOR STEP.
>> IT SHOWS UP IN A BOX LIKE
THAT
>> Reporter: THE PROGRAM I
MANAGED BY A CANADIAN COMPANY.
IT TRACKS THE PRICES O
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS IN FOUR
COUNTRIES.
WHICHEVER COUNTRY HAS THE LOWEST
PRICE ON A DRUG SUPPLIES IT FROM
LICENSED BRICK-AND-MORTA
PHARMACIES
TAKE THE EXAMPLE OF A THRE
MONTH SUPPLY OF THE ASTHMA DRU
ADVAIR
UNDER THE STIPULATE'S REGULA
HEALTH PLAN IT COSTS JUST UNDE
$600
THE CANADIAN PLAN IMPORTS IT FOR
OVER $100, SHIPPING INCLUDE.
WITH DISCOUNTS LIKE THAT THE
CITY OF PORTLAND SAVES $200,00
A YEAR ON HEALTH CARE AN
THERE'S NO CO-PAY FOR EMPLOYEES.
TWO YEARS AFTER THE CITY
LAUNCHED ITS PROGRAM THE LARGEST
EMPLOYER IN ONE OF MAINE'S
POOREST COUNTIES FOLLOWED SUIT
HARDWOOD PRODUCTS MAKES FOOD
STICKS, THE WOODEN HANDLES THA
GO INTO POPSICLES, CORN DOGS AND
SO ON.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER SAYS THE
FAMILY OWNED COMPANY CAN DO
LOT THE $400,000 A YEAR IT SAVES
ON THE PLAN.
>> THAT MONEY CAN BE USED FO
EMPLOYEE RAISES.
THAT MONEY CAN BE USED TO OFFSET
THE COST OF THEIR HEALTH CARE.
IT CAN BE USED TO INVEST I
EQUIPMENT SO WE CAN PRODUCE NE
PRODUCTS
>> Reporter: THE STATE O
MAINE'S HEARTH PLAN DECIDED TO
OFFER THE CANADIAN OPTION.
OVERNIGHT THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE PLAN WENT FRO
3,200 TO MORE THAN 33,000.
THAT'S WHEN MAINE'S PHARMACIST
DECIDED THEY HAD TO DO SOMETHING
STOP IT.
>> WHEN WE FOUND OUT THAT TH
MAINE STATE EMPLOYEES UNION WA
GOING CONTRACTING WITH THI
ORGANIZATION WE REALIZED IT WA
AGAINST BOTH STATE AND FEDERAL
LAW.
>> Reporter: MAINE PHARMACISTS
AND OTHER OPPONENTS OF MAI
ORDER DRUGS SAY THE IMPORT
VIOLATE THE FEDERAL FOOD DRU
AND COSMETIC ACT
AND THAT THEY RAN AFOUL OF STATE
LAW BECAUSE MAINE'S PHARMACY
BOARD HADN'T LICENSED TH
FOREIGN PHARMACIES TO PRACTICE
IN THE STATE
ARNOLD ADMITS MAINE RESIDENT
HAVE BEEN CROSSING THE BORDE
INTO CANADA FOR YEARS TO GET
CHEAPER DRUGS FROM RETAI
PHARMACIES LIKE THE SENIORS DI
IN THE EARLY 2000s
BUT SHE SAYS MAIL ORDE
PHARMACIES IN CANADA MAY OPERATE
WITH NO OVERSIGHT AND LO
STANDARDS.
>> WHO IS GOING POLICE THAT?
THOSE COMPANIES CAN PARTICIPAT
IN WHAT WE CALL PARALLEL
IMPORTATION.
THEY CAN GET THEIR DRUGS FRO
OTHER COUNTRIES.
BECAUSE IT'S COMING INTO THE
U.S. FROM CANADA DOESN'T MEAN IT
STARTED IN CANADA.
>> Reporter: THE MEDICINES MIGHT
BE OLD, INEFFECTIVE OR
COUNTERFEIT.
IN SEPTEMBER OF LAST YEA
MAINE'S THEN ATTORNEY GENERA
AGREED THE PHARMACISTS THA
IMPORTING DRUGS VIOLATED STATE
LAW.
SO THE PROGRAM WAS SUSPENDED I
MAINE.
>> WE WERE VERY ANGRY WOULD BE
THE BEST WAY OF PUTTING IT
>> Reporter: SCOTT SAYS TH
RULING INFLICT AD LOT OF PAIN ON
THE LOSE OF HARDWOOD PRODUCTS.
>> THEY HAD TO MAKE DECISION
OKAY DO I TURN THE HEAT DO I
WINTER
I TALKED TO AN EMPLOYE
YESTERDAY THAT TOLD ME THEY AR
GLAD THE PROGRAM IS BACK BECAUSE
NOW THEY ARE TAKING THEI
MEDICATION BECAUSE THEY STOPPE
TAKE ONE WHILE THE PROGRAM WAS
SUSPENDED.
>> Reporter: HE DECIDED IT WAS
TIME TO PUSH BACK.
SO HE REACHED OUT TO A LOCAL
FIREWOOD DEALER.
>> YOU DON'T GET TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF PEOPLE.
I HAVE THIS DRUG, THIS PILL AN
IT WILL SAVE YOUR LIFE
WHAT WILL WE GIVE YOU FOR IT
IS THAT THE WAY WE DO BUSINESS
IN THE UNITED STATES
AND, OF COURSE, YOU'RE GOING T
PAY WHATEVER YOU HAVE TO THE
SAVE YOUR LIFE AND THAT'
NOTORIETY.
IT'S REAL CLOSE TO HOLDING A GUN
TO PEOPLE'S HEAD
>> Reporter: DOUG THOMAS DOESN'T
SELL JUST FIREWOOD HE'S
REPUBLICAN STATE SENATOR
HE CALLS HIMSELF A CONSERVATIVE.
SAYS HE HATES UNIONS AND
BELIEVES IN FREE ENTERPRISE AN
COMPETITION AND THINKS THE
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY NEED
MORE REGULATION.
>> THE DRUG COMPANIES HAVE DON
A VERY GOOD JOB AT TELLING
PEOPLE THAT THEY NEED ALL THIS
MONEY FOR RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT AND IF WE DON'T GIVE
THEM EVERYTHING THEY WANT THEN
WE'RE NOT GOING TO HAVE THES
NEW DRUGS.
AND I JUST ABSOLUTELY DON'
BELIEVE IT
THE CANADIAN SYSTEM WORKS.
THE AUSTRALIAN SYSTEM WORKS.
THE DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM IN NE
ZEALAND WORKS AND IT CAN WOR
BETTER HERE.
>> Reporter: HE INTRODUCED A
BILL THAT LEGALIZE
PHARMACEUTICAL IMPORTS SO DI
ONE OF HIS DEMOCRATI
COLLEAGUES
THEY ROLLED THEIR BILLS INTO ONE
AND JOINED FORCE AND BOTH SIDE
OF THE ISSUE SENT THEI
LOBBYISTS TO WORK.
>> THERE WERE FOUR OF US THA
WERE LOBBYING ON BEHALF OF THE
BILL
THERE WERE AT LEAST 12 LOBBYISTS
FROM REPRESENTING PHARMACIES
>> Reporter: THE PHARMACISTS AND
DRUG COMPANIES ARGUED THE BILL
WOULD ENDANG TERRIFY PEOPLE OF
MAINE.
BUT IN JUNE THE BILL PASSED BOTH
HOUSES WITH BIPARTISAN
MAJORITIES
MAINE BECAME THE FIRST STATE I
THE NATION TO LEGALIZE MAI
ORDER DRUG IMPORTS
IN
SEPTEMBER A MONTH BEFORE IMPORTS
COULD RESUME THE PHARMACEUTICA
INDUSTRY AND ITS ALLIES FILED
FEDERAL LAWSUIT TO STRIKE DOWN
THE LAW.
>> THERE'S SEVERAL THINGS WRON
WITH THE MAINE LAW NOT LEAST O
WHICH IS THE FACT THAT I
VIOLATES THE FEDERAL FOOD AN
DRUG ADMINISTRATION, LAW
PROHIBITING THE IMPORTATION OF
PRESCRIPTION MEDICATION OUTSID
OF THE FDA'S REGULATOR
CONSTRUCT.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS FEDERAL LAW
GIVES THE FOOD AND DRU
ADMINISTRATION THE AUTHORITY T
REGULATE DRUG IMPORTS AND THAT
AUTHORITY IS ILLEGALLY UNDERCU
BY THE MAINE LAW
>> EFFECTIVELY IT PERMIT
PATIENTS TO GO ON THE INTERNET
WHICH IS UNREGULATED AND BRING
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS INTO TH
UNITED STATES OUTSIDE OF TEE
FDA'S LARGE FEDERAL PURVIEW.
IT'S VERY CONCERNING
>> Reporter: LIKE MAIN
PHARMACISTS AMELIA WHO IS ONE OF
THE LEAD PLAINTIFFS, MURPHY SAYS
STOPPING MAIL ORDER IMPORTS IS
ALL ABOUT SAFETY
THEY SAY MOST DRUGS HAVE CHEAPER
GENERIC EQUIVALENT SO THERE'S NO
NEED TO TAKE A CHANCE ON FOREIGN
PHARMACEUTICALS.
HE SAID IN 2003 THE FDA WARNED
THE CANADIAN COMPANY THAT IT WAS
PUTTING THE HEALTH OF TH
AMERICAN AT RISK WITH INSULIN, A
DRUG THAT HAD TO REFRIGERATORED.
>> PEOPLE IN MAINE SAY THESE ARE
THE SAME DRUGS AVAILABLE IN TH
U.S.
THESE ARE DRUGS THEY ARE GETTING
MADE BY MEMBERS OF YOU
ORGANIZATION
>> THEY ARE ABLE TO TEST THOSE
DRUGS WHEN THEY COME HOME AN
VERIFY THAT THEY ARE OR THAT
THEY JUST HAVE A LABEL ON THEM
THAT WANT INDICATES THAT THE
ARE THE SAME DRUGS
I MEAN THAT'S TINTING QUESTION
RIGHT?
NO ONE WHO IS PERSONALLY
IMPORTING A DRUG INTO THE UNITED
STATES AND BRING TO IT THEIR
HOME HAS ANY IDEA WHAT'S IN THAT
DRUG
WE'VE SEEN EVEN IN THE PAST THAT
DRUGS THAT CAME IN THROUGH
CANADA CERTAIN CANCER DRUGS SOLD
TO PHYSICIANS AND PHYSICIANS
COULDN'T VERIFY TH
AUTHENTICITY
>> Reporter: THE RESPONSE WE GET
FROM PHARMA AND PHARMACIST'S
ASSOCIATION YOU DON'T KNOW FOR
SURE HOW RELIABLE THESE FARM
SERVICE AND IT'S TOO LATE IF
SOMEBODY GETS SICK
DOES THAT CONCERN YO
>> WITH OUR EXPERIENCE, TH
PHARMACIES THAT WE'RE HAVING
FILL THESE PRESCRIPTIONS ARE
LICENSED RETAIL PHARMACIES
IF YOU'RE GETTING, FOR EXAMPLE
CRESTOR, YOU GET LOT NUMBER,
DATE KOERKD EVERYTHING IS ON THE
PACKAGE.
YOU CAN TRACE THE PEDIGREE LIK
YOU CAN IN THE U.S
>> Reporter: HE SAYS HE KNOW
WHAT HE'S TALKING ABOUT BECAUS
HE'S ALSO CFO OF HARDWOO
COMPANY'S SIBLING COMPANY.
IT MAKES MEDICAL SUPPLIES.
>> WE LOVE LOTS, DATE CODES,
EXPIRATION
WE MAKE FDA REGISTERED DEVICES
HERE
WE HAVE FDA AUDITS
WE UNDERSTAND HOW THAT PROCESS
WORKS.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS HE HOPE
THE STATE OF MAINE PREVAILS IN
COURT SO MORE OF HIS NEIGHBORS
CAN TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE LOWE
PRICES ON FOREIGN DRUGS.
IF MAINE DOES WIN OTHER STATES
ARE LIKELY TO FOLLOW ITS LEAD BY
ALLOWING MAIL ORDER IMPORTS.
THE DATE OF OPENING ARGUMENT
WITH THE CASE MOVES TO THE
COURTROOM HASN'T BEEN SET.
>>> SEE HOW WON WOMAN NEGOTIATED
HER WAY TO LOWER PRESCRIPTIO
DRUG PRICES.
VISIT "NEWSHOUR".PBS.ORG
>> THE NATION WILL MARK THE 50th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE ASSASSINATION
OF JOHN F. KENNEDY
WHAT HAPPENED IN THE CBS
NEWSROOM THAT DAY IS A SUBJECT
OF JFK 1:00 P.M. CENTRAL
STANDARD TIME FROM THE PBS
SERIES "SECRETS OF THE DEAD.
IT PREMIERES THIS WEDNESDAY.
>> RADIO HAS ANNOUNCED HE'
DEAD
>> WHO SAID?
>> THEY MUST BE GOING WITH THE
REPORT OUT OF DALLAS
>> IT WASN'T ENOUGH FOR WALTE
CRONKITE
>> THE TEMPTATION HAD TO B
GREAT TO SAY FLAT OUT PRESIDEN
KENNEDY HAD DIED
BUT THEY DIDN'T DO THAT BECAUS
IT WAS SUCH A MOMENTUS THING T
DECLARE TO THE ANYTHINGS
>> WALTER WAS VERY DELIBERAT
BECAUSE HE HAD TIME THOUGH I AND
IT WAS IN HIS OWN INSTINCT T
NOT SAY HE WAS DEAD UNTIL THEY
WERE SURE.
ON THE OTHER HAND YOU WANT TO BE
FIRST.
>> BLOOD HAS BEEN RUSHED INT
THE ROOM FOR TRANSFUSION
TWO PROTESTS WERE CALLED INT
THE ROOM
>> MOST REPORTERS DID THINK HE
WAS DEAD BUT NOBODY OFFICIALLY
SAID IT.
>> THERE'S REPORT IN DALLAS YO
HEARD FROM OUR AFFILIATE THERE
EDDIE BARKER THAT THE PRESIDEN
IS DEAD BUT THAT'S NOT BEE
CONFIRMED BY ANY OTHER SOURCE.
>> WALTER CRONKITE BECAUSE O
HIS ANCHOR ON A NATIONAL NETWORK
KNEW THAT HE DIDN'T WANT T
REPORT WHAT SOMEBODY WAS
THINKING OR WHAT SOMEBODY HA
BEEN TOLD BY A SECOND SOURCE
HE WANTED TO WAIT UNTIL THER
WAS OFFICIAL CONFIRMATION FROM
THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> NOWADAYS YOU HEAR IT, YOU
STICK IT ON THE AIR.
YOU HEAR IT YOU PUT IT ON TH
WEB.
WHETHER IT'S TRUE OR NOT
NOBODY SEEMS TO CARE
IN THOSE DAYS EVERYTHING WAS
EDITED
NOTHING WENT ON THE AIR WITHOU
GOING THROUGH ANOTHER MIND
WITHOUT SAYING WAIT A MINUTE
WHAT DO WE REALLY KNOW HERE?
>> JOIN US TOMORROW AND ONLINE
HOW ONE EUROPEAN NATION PROVIDES
PENSION FOR ALMOST ALL OF IT
CITIZENS
>> YOU FORCE PEOPLE TO SAVE FOR
THEIR OLD AGE.
>> THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN
THANKS FOR WATCHING.